in the mail on Sunday that some people
feel frustrated with the new rules and
and here's the business sector II now
I'm joined today by Professor sleepers
who is the national medical director of
NHS England and I will shortly be
setting out our progress on vaccines but
first I want to update you on the latest
data on the current of virus response
two million five hundred and eighty
thousand seven hundred and sixty nine
tests for corona virus have now been
carried out in the UK including ninety
one thousand two hundred six tests
carried out yesterday two hundred forty
three thousand three hundred and three
people have tested positive thus an
increase of three thousand one hundred
and forty two cases since yesterday
unfortunately due to technical issues
Northern Ireland have been unable to
process any testing data for pillar one
today today's daily totals therefore
reflect pillar one data for Great
Britain only excluding Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland are looking to resolve
this issue as soon as possible and will
update the data when we can ten thousand
and thirty five people are in hospital
with cope nineteen down fifteen percent
from eleven thousand eight hundred and
seventeen this time last week and sadly
of those tested positive uh coronavirus
across all settings thirty four thousand
six hundred and thirty six have now died
that's an increase of one hundred and
seventy fatalities since yesterday
our thoughts are very much with the
families and loved ones of those who've
lost their lives before talking about
the work on vaccines and taking
questions I just want to remind everyone
of the details of the next phase of our
fight against corona virus could I have
slide one please
so first in order to monitor our
progress we have established a Nuke ovid
alert level system with five levels each
relating to the level of threat posed by
the virus the alert level is based
primarily on the r-value and the number
of
virus cases an intern that alert level
will determine the level of social
distancing measures in place the lower
the level the fewer the measures the
higher the level the stricter the
measures throughout the period of
lockdown which started on master 23rd we
have been at level four thanks to you
people across the country we have
collectively helped to bring the are
level down and we are now in a position
to begin moving to level three
in careful steps slight to please we
have set out the first of three steps we
will take to carefully modify the
measures gradually ease the lockdown and
begin to allow people to return to their
way of life but crucially was avoiding
will be a disastrous second peak that
overwhelms the NHS after each step we
will closely monitor the impact of that
step on the are and the number of
infections and all the available data
and we will only take the next step when
we are satisfied that it is safe to do
so
as a prime minister announced this week
as part of the first step those who
cannot work from home should now speech
their employer about going back to work
you can now spend time outdoors and
exercise often as you like you can meet
one person outside of your household in
an outdoor public place provided you
stay two metres apart slide three please
having taken the first step in carefully
adjusting some of the measures and our
advice to people and what to do we have
also updated what we are asking people
to do which is to stay alert control the
virus and save lives
staying alert for the vast majority of
people still means staying at home as
much as possible but there are a range
of other actions for advising people to
take people should stay alert by working
from home if you can limiting contact
with other people keeping distance if
you go out two metres apart
where possible washing your hands
regularly wearing a face covering when
you are in enclosed spaces where it's
difficult to be socially distant for
example in some shops and on public
transport and if you anyone in your
household has symptoms you all need to
self isolate because if everyone stays
alert and follows the rules we can
control coronavirus by keeping the are
down and reducing the number of
infections this is how we can continue
to save lives as we begin as a nation to
recover from coronavirus but in order to
definitively conquer this disease we
need to find a safe workable vaccine
last month I announced a new vaccine
task force to coordinate the efforts of
government academia and industry in the
critical mission to find a vaccine I'm
very proud of how quickly our scientists
and researchers have come together in
their efforts develop a vaccine that
will combat coronavirus their work has
meant that two of the world's
frontrunners to develop a vaccine are
right here in the UK at the University
of Oxford and Imperial College London
the first clinical trial of the Oxford
vaccine is progressing well with all
phase one participants having received
their vaccine dose on schedule earlier
this week they're now being monitored
closely by the clinical trial team the
speed at which Oxford University has
designed and organized these complex
trials is genuinely unprecedented
Imperial College are also making good
progress and we will be looking to move
into clinical trials by mid-june with
larger scale trials plan to begin in
October so far the government has
invested 47 million pounds in the Oxford
and imperial vaccine programs but today
I can announce an additional
84 million pounds of new government
funding to help accelerate their work
this new money will help mass-produce
Yocto vaccine so if current trials are
six
vessel we have dosages to start
vaccinating the UK population straight
away the funding will also allow
Imperial to launch phase 3 clinical
trials with vaccine later this year I
can also confirm that with government
support
Oxford University has finalized a global
licensing agreement with Astra Zeneca
for the commercialization and
manufacturing of the Oxford vaccine this
means that if the vaccine is successful
Astra Zeneca will work to make 30
million doses available by September for
the UK as part of an agreement today
over 100 million doses in total the UK
will be first to get access or we can
also ensure that in addition to
supporting people here in the UK were
able to mil to make the vaccine
available to developing countries at the
lowest possible cost to further support
our domestic manufacturing capability
last month I announced that the
government will accelerate building the
UK's first vaccines manufacturing
Innovation Centre which is based at
Harwell in oxygen and today I can
announce that we will invest up to a
further 93 million pounds in the centre
ensuring that it opens in summer 2021 a
full 12 months ahead of schedule the
centre which is already under
construction will have capacity to
produce enough vaccine doses to serve
the entire UK population in as little as
six months but if and it is a big if a
successful vaccine is available later
this year we will need to be in a
position to manufacture it at scale and
quickly so whilst center is being built
the government will establish a rapid
deployment facility thanks to a further
investment of 38 million pounds to begin
coronavirus vaccine manufacturing at
scale from this summer this facility
will support efforts to ensure a vaccine
is widely available for the UK public as
soon as possible in total
the government has now committed over a
quarter of a billion pounds towards
developing a vaccine in the UK but there
are no certainties in spite of the
tireless efforts of our scientists it is
possible that we may never find a
successful coronavirus vaccine so we
also need to look at other drug
treatments and therapeutics for those
who get the virus treatments that could
prevent people progressing to see their
severe illness or help save lives of
those with serious symptoms whilst there
are currently no drugs in the world that
have been clinically proven to treat
coronavirus the government is working
with our scientists and medical experts
to identify promising candidates this
collaborative UK program known as Accord
aims to get an early indication of drug
treatments effectiveness in treating
coronavirus and today I can report that
six drugs have now entered initial live
clinical trials if positive results are
seen they will advance into larger scale
trials our scientists are working
tirelessly to develop vaccines and drug
treatments condensing work that would
usually take years into months and even
weeks their drive and dedication
inspires us all and with their help we
will overcome coronavirus Steve could I
ask you to present the rest of a slide
please Thank You Secretary of State and
good afternoon before I present today's
data slides I'd like to provide a brief
update on how the NHS has been
responding to coronavirus as I'm sure
everybody knows NHS staff have been
working around the clock to respond to
the corona virus pandemic while at the
same time ensuring that essential and
urgent services such as a and ease and
specialist care for stroke and heart
attacks continue in a safer way as
possible but we have been really
concerned that a combination of worries
about the virus and not wanting to be a
burden on NHS staff has meant that some
people haven't come forward for care for
themselves or their families when they
would usually have done so and we saw
that in the
record low number of ane attendances but
we saw last month the majority of the
reduced tendencies were for lower risk
conditions so for example sprains were
down by 80% alcohol intoxication by just
under 60% and finger wounds down by just
under 50% but we also worried that
within that fall in attendance EES were
people who should have come to A&E and
whose health might be put at risk by not
doing so but encouragingly the latest
data suggests that since we launched our
help you hitori are help us help you
campaign the number of people attending
with symptoms of heart attacks for
instance has increased back towards that
we that we would expect ordinarily now
that doesn't mean that more people are
having these problems it means that the
50% drop in people seeking help has now
gone back to normal in the past month
and it shows the message we've been
getting out use the NHS as normal when
you need it is being heard but there's
no room for complacency and so we will
continue to remind you that the NHS is
there for you when you need it
expectant mums worried about the
movement of their babies anyone
experiencing symptoms of a stroke or for
instance patients of children with
emergency asthma attacks while at the
same time hospitals have in place the
infection control mechanisms in their
80s and in their acute wards that
ensures that everybody can be treated
safely if I can now turn to today's data
slides these are in the usual order
starting first with data from the social
distancing that we've all been asked to
carry out over the last number of weeks
and again you can see as we've shown you
before a variety of data from different
modes of transport including public
transport where you will see that there
has been a big reduction in rail in
transport in London and in bus buses
throughout the country also in vehicles
although as we've noted previously that
has started to increase a bit
over the last a few weeks next slide
please the next slide takes us to
testing you have heard today's testing
figures and you will know that there has
been a large increase in the amount of
testing capacity and that has been
matched with increases in the number of
tests that are being carried out each
day that in turn means that we're able
to confirm cases of coronavirus by test
positive and as I've said before the
number of daily confirmed positive cases
is staying fairly stable and that is in
the context of an increasing testing
program which mirrors the observation
that the spread of this infection in the
community is falling but as I've also
said previously the only way we will
continue to ensure that happens is by
complying with the social distancing
measures that we have in place next
slide now we move on to data from
hospitals and there are two graphs here
the first at the top shows the new daily
admissions of patients with corona virus
and you can see that since a peak in
April the number of patients in our
hospitals with corona virus has steadily
fallen and it continues to fall albeit
on a slow decline you can also see that
that's me read in our sickest patients
who require treatment in our critical
care facilities our IT use and you can
see that as a proportion there has been
a steady fall throughout all parts of
the UK over the last number of weeks and
that is also reflected in a fall in the
absolute numbers of patients who are in
our critical care facilities next slide
this shows more generally the number of
people are in hospital you can see that
there are 10,000 just over 10,000 people
are in hospital with kovat 19 but that
represents a fall of around 1,800 from
the same day last week so steady
declines in the overall number of people
or
all wards in our hospitals and you can
see in a regional breakdown that the
reduction has been greatest in London
but the fall is also occurring in other
parts of the country although in at a
slight at a slower decline in some areas
and then the next slide the final slide
shows sad deaths that we had from kovat
19 and again you have heard today's
figures from Secretary of State the
chart shows those daily figures in all
settings there is variation from day to
day particularly at weekends we're
reporting may lag but the important part
of that chart to look at is the
seven-day rolling average which has been
falling and continues to fall and once
again this reflects that the social
distancing measures that have been put
in place and the public's compliance
with them has led through to reduction
not just in hospital missions but also
in deaths
thank you Steve thank you very much for
that
I think people watching will I'm quite
sure be aware that zoom uses I
encountering some issues at the moment
and so unfortunately we won't be able to
get any journalists live on screen
instead I'll be reading out their their
questions which have been sent in but
let's start with the first question from
the public Peter from County Durham the
rr8 in the northeastern New York Shearer
is now the highest in England does the
government acknowledged that a phased
geographically based lifting of the
lockdown would have been a better option
thank you very much for that Peter look
what I would say is that you know we
have taken a whole of UK approach to
this this whole issue and of course as
national monitoring becomes a much more
precise and larger scale one can look to
see what you might do at a level of
devolved administration's or indeed
regions but I think it is too soon for
any of that right now
and that is why we continue to take a
whole of UK approach on this that Steve
do you want to comment any further on
our yes I think that's exactly the point
there will be variation between
different parts of the country that
occurs naturally in epidemics we see
that for instance in the flu season each
winter I think what's important going
forward as a Secretary of State has said
is that increasingly we will be able to
measure our direct the office for
national statistics this week provided
the first publication of their direct
testing of a random sample of the
population and over the next few weeks
as that data is available longer to
delije week on week and as that program
expands we will have much better
information of the directly measured our
rate rather than our rate that is
derived from models and other
observations and that I think will give
us a clearer picture of exactly how the
infection is progressing in different
parts of the country great thank you
Steve the next question is remember that
the public from Miriam from Solihull let
me read that out he said why are
visitors from France the UK to be exempt
from the proposed quality rules
what can I just say that the firstly I
think what we've been very keen on as as
part of the whole process is to keep the
our rate down and it's really important
that we do that we keep this below 1
that is why we are going to be
introducing containing measures
particularly important now that the
transmission rate domestically has has
come down and I just want to be clear on
this is it I didn't there's a trade-off
between the the health of the nation of
the healthy economy Miriam makes
reference to to France there have been
discussions between the Prime Minister
and president macro the we are you know
when details become available we will
set them out but what I would say is
that what is important to realize a
reason we're going to be introducing
quarantine measures with some limited
exceptions is precisely booked because
we want to protect the UK population now
that they have made sacrifices and
managed to get the our rate below 1
right I think we now let's move on to
the the journalist I think the first
question is from Vicki young from the
BBC
vicki has asked the following question
which is that are you guaranteeing that
a test track and trace system for
teachers and pupils will be in place by
the 1st of June when many primary school
pupils are due to return to classrooms I
think firstly I want to thank teachers
because they have managed to keep
schools open for vulnerable children and
indeed for the children of essential
workers during this pandemic period and
they apps you deserve our thanks we have
set out the the education secretary set
out a how one would operate in a school
setting and Safety's app Superman we
want to make sure that pupils are safe
and of course teachers are safe as well
and that's why we've set out measures
you know talking about the fact that we
have smaller numbers of class sizes we
limit a contact we make sure that we
also ensure much more regular cleaning
of surfaces that we have children
washing their hands so that whole issue
an hour around hygiene but that is how
we're going to make sure that we keep
pupils and teachers safe and we will
continue to have those discussions with
teachers what I would say again is that
we've seen in the last few days and some
of the biggest Academy chains are saying
that they will look to open if the
government says it is safe earliest by
the 1st of June to get primary school
kids who are in a reception year 1 and
year 6 back into school but absolutely
safety is paramount sure you have the
second question from the media is from
Shahab Khan at ITV we are starting to
see regional differences in the response
to current a virus some regions will not
be taking the government's advice and
opening schools are you concerned about
the regional discrepancies are you happy
to encourage different regional
responses well can I just build on the
answer that I gave to the question from
Vicky young at the BBC the the reason
that we of course have said that we want
to see primary school turned back verses
because we all know that early learning
is absolutely there's early years
absolute vital in terms of developing
cognitive skills and emotional skills
and you know this is aimed at children
who are benefiting from getting those
core skills of reading writing
arithmetic and that is why we have set
out that at the earliest we would do
this by it by June we will continue to
have discussions with teachers head
teachers we want everyone to feel safe
but what we have set out is something
that we're talking about for across the
whole country
and as I said there are Academy chains
across the country who have said that
they will look to return primary school
kids to school when the government says
it is safe to do so I don't know about
anything right on that question
okay very good the next question is from
Charlotte Ivers that talk radio it's for
Steven pass one of the government's five
tests for lifting lockdown is there any
supply issues of PPE and tests are
resolved and the NHS can meet future
demand are we there yet
and if not what is your best estimate
for when we will be there so thank you
Charlotte
so I think there are three separate
questions there one on P P one on
testing and then on the more general
question of the NHS capacity to meet
kovat 19 going forward so on the first
two of course government is leading on
the procurement of PPE and on the
provision of tests the situation with
PPE has gradually improved over the last
few weeks but I do understand that it
continues to be a challenge in terms of
international procurement at a time when
many many countries are sourcing PPE
what's important as I've often said is
that for frontline staff that they do
have the confidence that they are
supplied with the PPE that they need
to to treat their patients and the
people in their care safely to keep the
patient safe and themselves safe so I'm
confident that that the government is
addressing that but I don't
underestimate the challenges going
forward on texting as you have heard
there has been an increase in the
capacity for testing Prime Minister has
set another ambition within the NHS we
are doing our part in the NHS labs as
part of that testing program we have
been expanding the availability of tests
to those both that we look after and to
our staff so to give you some insight
into that we have been for several weeks
now testing all patients who present to
our hospitals with an emergency whether
or not they have symptoms of Cova at
19:00 so that we can absolutely ensure
that we've picked up on all people who
are infected who are coming into
hospital we have recently issued
guidance in the last week around
elective admission so people who will be
coming into hospital not as an emergency
but for planned procedures and how we
can ensure that together with testing
they can come in kovat free and safely
we have been testing staff and indeed
all other other key workers but
particularly staff in the NHS who are
symptomatic with kovat 19 symptoms but
we have also asked our hospitals as
capacity increases to increasingly test
staff who have no symptoms who have or
who have very mild symptoms to ensure
that we are picking up as many potential
cases as possible so that is how in the
NHS we have been able to use our testing
capacity to increase our testing and our
understanding of how this virus is
transmitted and then finally on NHS
future demand so I think one of the
things that we should be proudest of is
that our NHS staff have acted
magnificently over the last two months
to ensure that NHS capacity has always
been there for the surge that we have
seen in coronavirus patients at
no time that we run out of capacity
either in our general wards or in our
intensive care units and the graphs I
showed you earlier showed how we saw
that increase in patients both in wards
and in IT use but at no time did we run
out of our ability to treat people and
we indeed we all always had spare
capacity there were always a large
number of intensive care beds that could
have been brought on if we needed them
including those in the nightingale and
I'm confident going forward that we will
be working with the NHS to ensure that
that remains the case and that we will
have capacity in place to ensure that we
will be able to cope with patients who
unfortunately need to be admitted with
Kovac Kovac 19 but of course the other
part of that is to ensure that everybody
in the public that we all comply with
the social distancing measures that we
are being asked to comply with at any
particular point in this epidemic
because it's only by doing that and
keeping the number the our number below
one so the level of infection low and
falling in the population that that
capacity can be there but won't need to
be to be used so success for us is
capacity that we build in to manage any
surge but not having to use that because
there are is below one and transmission
rates hollow in it we all have our place
to play in that great thanks for that
Steve the next question is from Frances
Elliott at the times will the UK have
enough capacity for the domestic
production of the vaccine by the time
one is developed or will we be relying
to some degree on other nations to
supply
well Frances hopefully the statement I
made has made that clear
we have set in place the a rapid
deployment facility as well so that we
are ready to start producing in in the
summer of this year and I have also
announced today the agreement that has
been reached between Astra Zeneca and
Oxford to make sure that by September
we have up to 30 million vaccine doses
available as part of a hundred million
in total should we have the next
question
it's from Martin Brown at the Express
will the government consider changing or
lifting the current 14 day quarantine
restrictions on arrivals to help boost
the economy and as a section state agree
with Heathrow boss John Holland Kay who
said today that if the right measures
are put in place a free flow of flights
to and from the UK could resume in the
next month or so well Matt this question
obviously a variation of it was raised
by by Miriam from Solihull again I think
what I would say is that what is ab c--
vital and what is very important for us
to realize is that the health of the
nation is not in some way different from
making sure that we take care of the
healthy economy and in fact all the
measures that we have taken so far is
about protecting lives and also
livelihoods as well and i recognize that
you know quarantining measures will put
restrictions on businesses being able to
travel business people being able to
travel we will be setting out shortly or
the exemptions and of course one of the
exemptions we have talked about is
people who are bringing freighter in so
Freight drivers but the key thing right
now is to make sure that we keep that
are down and I think in the in the
comments that John Holland came made
this morning he also listened in to I
think he understood the reason that we
were we were doing this and what I would
say is during this period we've of
course also that I've found more remote
ways of working and it's going to be
quite interesting to see how businesses
particularly service type businesses
adjust to that going forward thank you
for that so I think we've got a final
question from rapun Gina data from the
Asian voice one of our headline stories
highlighted the language and culture of
areas when it comes to contact tracing
which means recruitment within the be
AME community is essential what are you
doing to address this recruitment
channel challenge we're in general if I
can just say in terms of the the issue
around contact tracing we've now got
over 17,000 people recruited to that we
are very much on target to make sure
that we have the right number of people
and actually this is also a question of
making sure that people from across all
communities are able to come forward for
this really vital task as well and I
know one of the the big concerns has
been within the BMA community is being
disproportionately impacted by the virus
there is work that is ongoing in terms
of looking at Studies on that and
perhaps I can pass over to Steve to
comment a little bit on that particular
point but just to say in terms of
contact tracing I think there is a
that's a very important point and we
need to make sure that all communities
are represented as part of the team that
does the contract tracing thank you very
much so on that specific point I I do
agree that it is important but as we
move to a contact tracing to a track and
trace plan and that gets I rolled out
that it is available to all and that we
pay particular emphasis to those
communities that for whatever reason may
not always engage in a track and trace
or difficult to reach communities for
whatever reasons and Ruben Gianna who's
there highlighted issues around language
and cultural barriers but there are
other examples in other communities as
well where there may be other barriers
that that need to be taken into account
so I absolutely agree that it's
important that bodies thought of and
that we have representational
[Music]
recruitment so that we can effectively
work with with various communities on
the point about the main community being
affected by coronavirus as I've said
before what I know others standing here
have said that's a really
really important a question that we take
incredibly serious I do as a clinician
and as a doctor public health England as
I'm sure you know have been asked to
look into this and that work is ongoing
to understand the particular risk
factors that the main community may have
for coronavirus and specifically with
the NHS of course where we have a high
proportion of staff doctors nurses and
other clinicians from the main community
it's really important as an employer as
a health care system that we are able to
look after those staff to reassure them
to risk assess them individually and to
ensure that we put in place the measures
that might be required to keep them safe
and it's for that reason that we've been
working with independent experts and
through NHS employers we usually
guidance to NHS employers only last week
additional guidance or on how they might
approach that risk assessment of of all
staff but in particular members of the
bane community who do such a great job
for us in the NHS Steve thank you very
much we've come to the end of the press
conference and could I once again thank
all members of the public for everything
that you are doing individually to
ensure that we keep the our rate down
and I just end with our overall message
which is please stay alert control the
virus and save lives
thank you that's the business sector e
Alok Sharma at the helm of the latest
down easily
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News